One, two, three, four, one, two. One, two, three,
four, one, two, three, four, one, two. One, two,
three, four, one, two, three.
This is August 25. We're in the Blocker Building,
and I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with
Carl Schaefer, professor of agricultural
economics and a friend for almost 40 years. For the
sake of someone, Carl, who might not know you when
they listen to this tape or read the transcript a
half century from now, describe your family
background, growing up, where you went to school,
college, graduate school, and so forth. No
worries. Describe Carl Schaefer before getting
to College Station. From birth? Yes. I was born in
Oklahoma City. 1933. the depth of the Depression.
Moved to Alva, Oklahoma in 1934. My father's
health was such that he couldn't continue to work
in the hotel, so he came to Alva, Oklahoma, the home
of my grandparents, my grandfather having come
here from Germany in, we think, 1877. Alva's a
wheat farming community in northwest Oklahoma.
My father moved into the back of my grandfather's
harness shop with a radio shop, which I always
thought was an interesting juxtaposition.
Buggies and cornice in the front and radios in the
back. I grew up in Alva, Oklahoma. Should I mention
the gold bugs and the green bugs? Where are our
mascots? Went to Alva High School and I went to
Oklahoma A&M College. It was then in Stillwater,
Oklahoma, which became in 1957 Oklahoma State
University as we know it. I got a BS degree, and
actually I played basketball there, but I had to
take something, so I took agricultural economics
for BS, and I got a master's of agricultural
economics while I was waiting around for my wife to
graduate, and although I was interested in the
field. We left there in 57, went into the Army. The
Army had a surplus of officers, so I only did six
months active duty for training at Fort Monmouth,
New Jersey. And then from there we went to graduate
school at Pennsylvania State University. From
fall of 1957 when Sputnik went up and a lot of money
was then thrown at higher education
institutions, agriculture being among the
recipients. And as the Penn State left there in
1961, I actually came to my first job and only job
academically was at Texas A&M University from
January of 62. through September of 1998. We
arrived here on one of the coldest days of the year,
January 62. The place was frozen. That's a very
quick summary of where we've been. How did you and
A&M link up? What were they looking for, and how did
they find you, and how did you find them? Well, I had
met, people didn't visit, in those days you didn't
go somewhere, at least I didn't go somewhere for an
interview. You sort of did things over the phone,
by word of mouth, by somebody else that was known. I
had actually interviewed with Texas A&M at the
summer meetings, which are the big meetings of the
American Agricultural Economic Association in
1960. Ty Timm and John McNeely were there, Bob
Branson, and I interviewed with them, but I didn't
have the job, I think, probably until we got to be
1961. Then a friend of mine who'd been at Penn
State, C. Harold Brown, and his wife Sally were
here in sociology because the department was the
Department of Agricultural Economics and
Sociology, not rural sociology, but sociology.
And so Hal seemed to like it here, so we thought it
sounded good, and we were also provincial because
it was close to home. Being from Oklahoma, we
wanted to get somewhere back in the territory. We
had two children, and of course we had two sets of
grandparents in Oklahoma, But I had never heard of
Texas A&M until I was a senior in high school and
went to a football game at Oklahoma University.
They were playing Texas A&M, and there was all
these people standing over in the Texas A&M
section, which I thought was really strange. They
were all in uniform, and that's really the first
time that I'd ever heard of Texas A&M, as I said,
being provincial. But we got here through the fact
that it was located where it was and through Hal and
Sally Brown, and I think at that time A&M was
breaking out of its somewhat narrow orientation
in terms of whom they were hiring. When I got here,
there were, gosh, almost everybody in our
department had their degrees from Texas A&M. And I
think I was the third, maybe the third or fourth guy
in the department who didn't have their degree,
their terminal degree, as we say, from Texas A&M.
Did you interview over the phone? Was there a kind
of an interview, or back in the summer? Yeah, there
was a, well, at Colorado State, which is where the
meetings were in the 60s, I had talked to Branson
and Tim and Neely, but I did not come down here. No,
I'd never been here. But did they interview you?
Yes, yes, we talked, we visited. I mean, it wasn't
really a very formal interview, but we did visit.
As you recall, what were their key concerns about
whomever they might be hiring? Oh, gosh, that's
been a while, Haskell. Branson was really looking
for somebody to work with him in what would become
the Market Research Center. And I was in
marketing. I had been in milk marketing. I'd done
my work in the Amish country up there on bulk milk
handling. But it was close enough to marketing
that they were interested in someone in
marketing. And that's about as far as we got, I
think. Who else they talked about? The people at
Oklahoma State they may have interviewed. I don't
know. And of course, the head at Penn State. But I
can't remember other than just wanting to get
somebody in marketing and somebody with a degree
other than. Do you remember what kind of paperwork
you submitted to them as a part of the review
process? Well, it wasn't very extensive. I'm sure
there was probably a letter. I remember what I
filled out when I got here, some of that, but the job
application wasn't very complicated. As far as
you know, did they make some phone calls to some of
your former teachers? You know, I had to provide
references, and I assume they did, but I really
don't know. part of my career weakness was that I
didn't ever seek much advice from people or
discuss with them as much as I should with them, I
think, but I imagine they did. I know when we got
here, we had to sign a loyalty oath. I remember
that. It was a page that must have been hundreds of
organizations. I remember that piece of paper
worked. But other than that, it seemed pretty
standard stuff. When you came, how long did you
assume you might be here? Well, you know, in that
day, in the 60s, the early 60s, the mark of a good
academic was that you moved a lot. I mean, people
were coming. You remember Russ Thompson was here.
And of course, Hal left six months after we got
here, Hal Brown did. And so you moved a lot if you
were that active. I've always been sort of a static
equilibrium person. I'm not that interested in
moving, but more in doing the career where I was. So
I don't know, I guess you thought If I ever thought
about it, maybe, you know, five or ten years, first
job, not necessarily stay here, but Texas A&M
began to change so much. Did you have any school
that hidden back in your mind was your ultimate,
ultimate goal? No, I interviewed at Ohio State,
but that was an extension position. I wasn't
interested in that. But as far as going back to
Oklahoma State, no, that wasn't particularly an
objective. I think I was happy, as happy at A&M as I
probably would have been most places. Maybe
somebody thinks about, no, I don't think I want to
go to Harvard. Did any of your Penn State faculty or
student colleagues tell you anything about A&M?
What was their impression of A&M? Okay, we had a
faculty member at Penn State, Larry Foraker,
Professor Foraker in economics. His father had
been on the faculty in engineering at Texas A&M,
and I think his family was still here when I got
here. Foraker went on to be dean of the business
school at Harvard, which was interesting because
he graduated a Ph.D. from Colorado. But he was a
very good, I guess a very good administrator. He
was a good academician. And I talked to Dr. Foraker
about coming to A&M. And as I recall, he said, well,
it's a good place to start. That was about the only
advice he had. And I always saw him a few times
afterward. But other than that, I don't think most
of the guys at Penn State knew much about Texas A&M.
Did anybody tell you anything about College
Station O'Brien before you got here? Not a bit. Not
a bit. Didn't know what we were getting into. As I
said, we drove in. It was freezing, freezing.
Describe what you and your wife and children
brought with you. How voluminous were your
belongings? We had a two-wheel U-Haul trailer,
orange and white, I remember, which we packed in
Pennsylvania, and one of the pieces was a dry sink,
an antique dry sink from... Pennsylvania, which
if we'd known better, we'd have thrown all our
furniture away, loaded with antiques and brought
them down here because they were more valuable in
Texas. But we got all of our stuff in a two-wheel
U-Haul trailer, which we reloaded in Oklahoma
City because we could save money by switching
trailers in Oklahoma City to come to Texas. But
that was it. We slid all the way from Penn State,
from State College down through Well, all the way
down here, it was icy and snowy. I remember that.
But it was a risky trip. But we didn't take much to
have our possessions. And describe what it was
like to find a place to live. Well, now we had, I keep
forgetting people, but we knew, we also knew some
guys who were at Penn State. They had a big
meteorology Air Force program. And one of them
was, I can't think of Andy's last name, but Andy had
been come to Texas A&M. He's from Tennessee. He was
on the faculty here in mechanical engineering. I
forgot. I just remembered this just now. And Andy
and Wanda had found us a house over on Nagel, $90 a
month. And it was a two-bedroom, a very nice house,
not far from the campus. So we had already picked
out for us a house. We were lucky. We were lucky
these kids had got it for us. And, of course, Hal and
Sally were here, too. But you hadn't seen it yet.
No, no, I hadn't seen it. No, no. No, we hadn't seen
the house. We just pulled in sight unseen.
Describe what it was like to become a part of the
neighborhood and a part of the community for you
and Peggy and the children. Well, our idea in
becoming a part of the neighborhood was mostly to
join a church, to find a church. And we visited
around. We had been Southern Baptists all our
lives. Then we got to Pennsylvania and we became
American Baptists. And then we came back down
here, we visited around, and finally found the,
located at First Baptist Church College Station.
That really became our locus of our community. The
neighborhood, Zerl Carpenter, who became
director of extension, lived about four blocks
down from me when he first moved in from Wisconsin
as an assistant professor in animal science. I'm
trying to remember who else lived on Nagel Street.
A few other prominent people lived there. My next
door neighbor was a milkman, Albert Gruss, and
electrical engineering was next door. But we only
lived there, we were there about four years, I
guess, before we moved over to Gilchrist. So we did
meet some of the neighbors, but mostly our social
stuff, you know, was the department and the
church. That's where we were from. All right,
describe... I've got a frog in my throat. Okay,
describe your first days, weeks, months in the
department. getting received, an office, and
getting acquainted, and undertaking your first
work? Okay, we're in the agriculture building,
renamed the history building, right in front of
what used to be, well, no, no, it wasn't in front of
then. It was between the systems building and the
library, which was only a single building,
Cushing. So we're running between the Texas
engineering station and the system building. But
the ag building consisted of agriculture
economics, poultry science, and weed science,
whatever that is, was in the basement. My office
was with two other faculty in room 300 of the
agriculture building, top floor. There were
three of us in there shortly, and I got another
office. But I remember moving up there in January,
and it was cold. I didn't teach the first semester
because that was springtime, just showed up. I
missed the first, I missed the Agricultural
Primer Station Conference by a few days. I know Ty
wasn't happy about that. He thought I should be
there for that, which I didn't know was happening.
But I haven't met him, and I forget the other person
that was up there in that room. So I started
teaching, I think, the next fall. In agriculture,
we didn't teach like you do in history. We don't
teach as many courses. We're about half research,
half teaching. And then the summer came. But I got
oriented. I went around, met the dean. I didn't
meet President Rutter until he had come over to Dr.
Tim's office later. I met him, but I didn't meet. I
showed you around the dean. I met the director of
Experiment Station. Try and think who that... Oh,
gosh. He was a guy from Penn State. Lewis? Yeah,
R.D. Lewis, yeah. Great old gentleman. What was
your initial impression of the dean and of Dr.
Lewis? Well, the dean was... from Louisiana. Gus
Watkins? No, no. Patterson? Patterson, yeah.
R.E. Patterson. And he had played basketball.
Since I had played basketball. We hit it off very
well. But, you know, what did I know? I was like a
fish in... He doesn't know he's wet. I didn't know
what administrators were supposed to be like. I
had only known professors by and large. Everybody
seemed very pleasant. It was a very cordial place.
We felt welcome. I know Ty and Valerie and... Who
was the guy in the English department? Johnny... A
friend of Ty's, first month we were here, they took
us to Houston and took us shopping. John Paul
Abbott? No, it wasn't John. This guy was Johnny. He
was from East Texas. His wife was a Cajun. I can't
think of his last name. He was in the English
department, not John Paul Abbott. Anyhow, these
people all seemed, you know, like good folks to me.
I think one thing that impressed me was everybody
had a title. I wasn't used to leaders of this and
directors of that. Everybody I knew was just
professor or doctor. So I had to get used to the
nomenclature. But I thought we were well
received. What about Rudder when you first met?
What was your impression of him? Very impressive.
It wasn't standoffish so much as austere. I held
him in great awe. This was a man, and one didn't mess
with him. I didn't see a lot of his humor, but you
paid attention when he spoke. So he came to Dr.
Tim's office. In fact, as I recall, we were there He
said he didn't want to, and I think this
conversation took place when we were in Dr. Tim's
office about not integrating the school with
females and the Corps, making the Corps
voluntary, but then he was saying that he was going
to have to do this. He was going to have to do this or
the place was going to survive. My memory says that
I heard that in Dr. Tim's office. I may be wrong, but
I know he met in his office with President Rutter.
Was any mention made in that conversation about
his academic background and or his link to
agriculture, his interest in agriculture? Well,
it seemed, as I recall, he was interested in
agriculture, but there was no mention of his
academic background. In fact, I didn't even know
that he didn't have an extensive academic
background for some time. Now, did anybody in the
department or outside of the department give you,
as a new faculty member, advice on how to behave,
what to wear, what to do or not do? Oh, yeah, very
clear on what to wear. You always wore a tie, and if
you were going to teach, of course, you wore a coat
and tie. And even in the summertime, we would wear
ties, short-sleeved shirts, no question about
that, no shorts. I mean, nobody caught, you know,
you're always dressed with a tie and appropriate
attire, long pants. And in the summer, the first
year I got here was the last year that the
agricultural building was not air-conditioned.
Now, some of the guys had their own window units.
They belonged to them. They were their own. And at
that I think 63 then, they air conditioned the
building. But that summer of 62, and they showed me
why. People brought towels to the office, and they
would lay the towel on their desk. And you would
write so that it would absorb the perspiration as
you sat there in that office. Now, you had a window,
but still it was very hot if you didn't have an air
conditioner. And President Rutter, I think the
rumor was, thought when they air conditioned the
building, he was going to get these units. He
didn't realize that they belonged to the faculty.
So they all disappeared. and went back home or
someplace. In terms of appearance, what about
haircuts, beards, and mustaches? No, no beards.
Maybe there had been some mustaches, but no
beards. Everybody had short hair, at least that I
knew. Of course, agriculture was a little
different, but even the rest of the colleges. No,
it was a very straight laced. Did Dr. Tim or anybody
else give you any advice about being a new faculty
member and what to do to succeed? You know, that's a
good question. I think you sort of knew what you...
McNeely probably did more of that, John McNeely,
than Dr. Tim. And at that time, publication was
desired, but it wasn't the ultimate good in life.
It was sort of a mixture of things, research and
teaching in our case, some extension work, some
service, they call it service work. But they
weren't heavy-handed with advice because you
were given a little more... I don't know if you call
it freedom, but there wasn't as much, the pressure
wasn't as great. It was more academic in the old
sense where you were more your own boss and did your
own thing as long as you kept busy. I probably
didn't seek enough advice. Was anything ever said
about alcohol, tobacco, or anything like that? I
don't remember the alcohol thing, but tobacco.
Houston Smith, who was sort of an assistant, he was
really a cowboy. who Dr. Tim had brought in to do
survey work and research for research data,
Houston Smith would stand at the door of room 300
when it became a meeting room with a box of cigars.
And everybody almost would take a cigar when we
went in for a faculty meeting. And I mean, when the
faculty meeting got started, it was blue. You
could hardly see anybody else in the room because
everybody was smoking something. But I remember
that box of King Edward cigars he'd stand there
with at the door. And everybody, it was, you know,
it would be a nightmare in today's world. Who paid
for them? Who bought the cigars? I have no idea.
Maybe Ty. I'm sure Houston didn't. Now, there's a
good kind of thing to show how times have changed.
Oh, yeah. About how often did the department meet?
Oh, gosh, I think we had a weekly staff conference.
We had too many. I believe we met once a week. And how
many people would be there? Everybody. How many
was that? Oh. The room full must have been 30, 45
people. What kind of issues did you all discuss?
Well, a lot of things that probably didn't need
discussing, but everything from, I suppose, the
plumbing, I'm not sure what all. Not many big
decisions were discussed because Ty pretty much
took care of those. I think he'd bring things up
that he was going to discuss, but I don't remember
that it seemed like to us younger faculty members
that we spent too much time in meetings. So that's a
good question. What did we discuss? They weren't
seminars. They were faculty meetings, mostly
where you got information you were given. And he
was the department head, not the chairman. For
sure. He was a benevolent department head, yes.
Can you give some examples of early, in the early
years you were here, of the kinds of decisions that
he made? Well, I think all, as far as I can remember
now, unlike the way it is now, then promotions and
things like that were decided by probably Ty and
John McNeely and Pat Wooten. Pat Wooten, the
department was set up so that Ty was the head, John
McNeely ran the research side, Pat Wooten did the
teaching side, which included graduate and
undergraduate at that time. Later, they brought
in J.C. Grady as the undergraduate guy, and Pat was
the graduate advisor. And I'm thinking, I may be
wrong on this, it seems like Reagan Brown sort of
handled the extension part, but I could be wrong on
that. But Ty had it pretty well organized, where he
was the leader, and these other divisions were
headed up by other people. And as far as you knew,
he's the one that had made the decision to hire you.
Well, I'm sure he consulted with McNeely. I think
he was really close to McNeely and Pat Wooten. And
I'm sure the three of them would have to,
particularly he and McNeely would agree on it. As
far as you could compare At about the time you came
here, compare agricultural economics at Penn
State and at Texas A&M. Well, at that time, Penn
State would have been considerably, if you look at
publications and quote, learned journals,
unquote, and the reputation of their staff, Penn
State would have been certainly above Texas A&M.
But that's what Texas A&M is working on, bringing
in people like Russell Thompson. And I can
remember the guy who became quickly head of, or
worked at a station down here, Jim. My memory's
failing me. But I mean, they had good economists
here, like C.A. Bonin and people of that caliber.
But these guys, they didn't have PhDs. But they did
good, solid work. Bonnen's son later became a
fellow in the association, Jim Bonnen, up at
Michigan State. I'm sure I'm overlooking some
people, but Penn State would have definitely been
a higher rank than Texas A&M. Tim was known, but if
you looked at the journal articles at that time,
you might find one by Ty. They brought in Ken
Tiefertiller, too, from Oklahoma. A&M had come
down here. He was one of the other additions. But it
was definitely... And southern departments were
kind of looked down on in those days. But Penn State
would definitely have been above it in rank, and
A&M would have been at that, I think. All right. Did
you get the impression early that A&M was planning
on moving up in quality and reputation? Oh, yeah.
Yeah, that was pretty clear by the people that, the
three people that were, three or four that were
here before I got here in terms of spreading out the
geographical distribution of degrees and that
sort of thing. Yeah, I don't think there was any
question. Even in early 62, they were working
toward that. Now, your beginning salary was how
much? Seventy-five hundred dollars. Twelve
months? Twelve months. Twelve months. And what
was your original assignment, teaching,
research, and so forth, what were you to do? I'm
guessing, and I may be wrong, but it was no more than
twenty to twenty-five percent teaching and the
rest of it was research. And you have to remember
that in those days Agriculture got lots of money
from the federal government through the Hatch
Act, the marketing side. I forget all the history
on that, but we had no problem no problem getting
research money. It was by formula, and it was
allocated out to the states, and I could tell you
some stories that I've heard from history
professors on what they had versus what we had, but
I won't go into that. But so we had lots of research
money, relatively speaking, and we didn't teach,
nobody taught much in the way, maybe one course a
year, maybe two courses a year max. That's the way
it was. All right, and you were assigned to do what
kind of research? Marketing. I did marketing
research. When I first got here, I know we did some
carrot marketing. And the Valley was having
trouble with their carrot marketing order and
getting low prices and lots of volatility and risk
going on down there. Got into grapefruit
marketing, same sort of thing. Got into some egg
marketing in East Texas and so on. Marketing
projects, how do we improve the prices? How do we
improve the marketing system? Much of it was
descriptive research. It was not journal based
necessarily. Who did you work with from the campus
to get started in those assignments and what kind
of contacts did you make out in the field? Well we
worked with, I worked mostly with Bob Branson at
that time and making these contacts and other
people in marketing Some with Swede Sorenson.
I've forgotten Swede's first name because he was
always Swede Sorenson. He was into vegetables.
But in the Valley, we made contacts. Most
commodities have an association with Texas
Grapefruit Producers, Texas Vegetable Growers
Associations, and so on. So we made contacts with
them. I remember when I first got here, first year
or two, got a fantastic grant from the Texas
Vegetable Growers. I think it was like $2,000.
This was big bucks in those days. So once we got out
of association, we would work with them. But most
of our work, we didn't get grants. They didn't
support that because you had money from the
federal government to do these studies. And what
about the county, the local county agents or
regional extension officers? Did you work with
them much in those early years? The research side,
we would make contact with them, let them know we
were there. But generally, you operated at least I
did, in the marketing side, since it wasn't
production economics, I was doing marketing, you
operated somewhat independently of that. They
wanted to know if you were around, if you were in
their territory. Can you give some anecdotes that
you remember about what it was like for an
Oklahoman to get acquainted with some Texans out
in the field? How did a farmer respond to somebody
that was there to help him? Yeah, right. The
farmers were okay. It was the next step up, the
packers, the shippers, the guys who sometimes
when you were studying them, and Oklahoma is not
that much different from Texas. I mean, Texas may
not believe that, but it's not an altogether
foreign country. It was the proprietors, and I
almost got in some trouble down in the valley
because we were investigating the carrot thing,
and it was our hypothesis and I think a fact that the
shippers took advantage of the growers. And
looking into that, I was almost carried out of
office one time bodily because that was none of our
damn business. And leave him alone, don't ever
come back. So the producers were sympathetic to
what we were trying to do because mainly it was
producer-based marketing. But many times the
middlemen, the next step up, the buyer, the
packer, the shipper, were not sympathetic to what
you were doing unless they had initiated the
project. I never had trouble with the Texas
farmers, identifying with them, because I had
come from a farming community. I wasn't a farm boy,
but I worked on a farm, wheat harvest and so on, when
I was a kid. So I felt comfortable with them. Was
this your first encounter with Hispanic farmers,
workers? Well, we didn't, I hadn't, I can't think
of a thing where I, any occasions where I
encountered Hispanics. The people I worked with
in the valley, lower Grand Valley, were all
Anglos. And the workers or any farmers were
Anglos. The shippers were Anglos. The workers, of
course, out there were a lot of Hispanics, but I had
no direct contact with them. So there was not that,
I didn't feel that influence, although I was right
here in the middle of it. All right. In those early
years, about how much time were you on the road? How
often were you out? Well, we'd go out fairly often
to gather data, whether it was with the Valley, of
course. That was always an overnight trip. And you
usually drove down there, and you'd stay, you
know, two or three nights maybe. And then if you
went to Dallas to get data, you'd probably stay
overnight with some... Well, you always stayed in
a hotel or motel. But I was on the road. It's not like
being in the extension service in Texas. Now,
there you spend your life on the road. Even today,
it's... They spent a lot of time out, but I wasn't
gone that much getting data, and we got primary
data a lot of the time for research purposes, but I
wasn't gone that much on the road. And in what
vehicle or vehicles did you go? Well, you always
used a departmental or a motor pool vehicle. You
could check them out. You didn't take your own car,
rarely did you, and you just checked it out of the
motor pool. Did you ever have any unusual problems
with one of those vehicles? Not that I remember. I
know we didn't take them anywhere that we weren't
supposed to. No, but I mean, one never broke down
halfway between nowhere? No, I never had any
trouble with them. We did have a departmental
vehicle. It was a Chevrolet, whatever that thing
was that had the motor in the back. And we used to
have trouble with that. But no, I don't remember
being stranded with those vehicles. They were in
fairly good shape. And then later on, you begin to
take your own vehicle. And you just got paid
mileage. But most of us in those days only had one
car. And so if you took your car, your wife had no
car. So you didn't do that. Do you remember what the
per diem was in those days? No, I remember motels,
though, were like, you know, less than $20. And I
really don't remember what the per diem was. It
wasn't much. It didn't have to be much. Did anybody
give you any private advice of what?